---
seo_description: "In this blog post, I introduce our work on 'Pulling Back the Curtain on the Wizards of Oz', presented at ACM CSCW 2020 and published in the journal Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction."
---
# Performing the Wizards of Oz
The [Wizard of Oz experiment](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Wizard_of_Oz_experiment "Read about the approach on Wikipedia") (WOz) is a research approach in which an intelligent system is presented to users, typically as part of a research study. Unbeknownst to the user, the presented intelligence is a mirage, with the gubbins of the supposedly intelligent system run by a human operator pulling metaphorical levers. In other words, the intelligence is a *fiction*. In an article presented at [ACM CSCW 2020](https://cscw.acm.org/2020/ "The 23rd ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing"), and due to be published in [Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction](https://dl.acm.org/journal/pacmhci "The PACMHCI website"), we take a look at our use of the method and unpack the interactional work that goes into pulling off the method. In other words, we *pull back the curtain* on the Wizard of Oz. This blog post is a bit of a teaser, focusing solely on some of the elements of collaboration that we identified in our research. A PDF is available at [the end of this post]({{ page.url }}#assoc-pubs "Jump to the end of this blog post") if you'd rather just jump into the article.

<!--more-->

Alternatively, instead of (or in addition to) reading this blog post, you can also watch the presentation on YouTube (it was a virtual conference for 2020 for obvious reasons). This presentation includes a short video clip from the data we collected if you want to get a feel for how the study unfolded.

{% include figure_video.html video='https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/IMYt-AcjzI4' caption='Watch my presentation of the work at <a href="https://cscw.acm.org/2020/" title="The 23rd ACM Conference on Computer-Supported Cooperative Work and Social Computing">ACM CSCW 2020</a>' %}

As you can probably guess, the method's name comes from the L Frank Baum novel [The Wonderful Wizard of Oz](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/The_Wonderful_Wizard_of_Oz "Read about the book on Wikipedia, if you didn't already know abotu it"). Early use of the method in HCI took less exciting names like 'experimenter in the loop'[^1]. A WOz approach offers the ability to prototype and potentially validate—or not---design concepts through experimentation without the costly development time that a full system may require[^2]. Approaches have included simulating things such as a 'Listening Typewriter'[^3] and public service information lookup for a telephone line[^4]. In WOz, different elements may be simulated, ranging from database lookup through to mobile geolocation tracking[^5]. Due to the recent commericalisation of voice recognition technologies, there is a plethora of literature using the approach for studies in voice interface design, with natural language processing being the simulated component. I'd guess that's because building natural language interfaces is a costly endeavor (monetarily and timewise).

In our paper, we look at the use of a [voice-controlled mobile robot for cleaning](https://www.porcheron.uk/blog/2019/05/24/cleaning-a-factory-with-robots/ "Read about the RoboClean project"), where we simulated the natural language processing of the voice instruction, and conversion of this into an instruction to a robot (i.e. the Wizard listened to requests and controlled the robot). We were running this study as part of a language elicitation study, although that's really the focus of this article. Cruically our study required two researchers to operate the proceedings: one scaffolded the participant interaction and the other performed the work of the 'Wizard', responding to participants' requests and controlling the vacuum.

## Collaboration was key

In the paper we go into much more detail, focusing on the various aspects needed to orchestrate a WOz study, starting with the how the 'fiction' of the voice-controlled robot is established and presented to users, through to how the researchers running the study attend to a technical breakdown while running the study. We progressively establish the fiction as an interactional accomplishment between all three interactants (i.e. the two researchers and the participant).

{% include figure_image.html src="p11.png" alt="A video still showing the laboratory where the elicitation study took place. The Wizard is shown in the top left of the room (A) and in the cut-out image from the opposite angle. \itr{P11} (B) is standing with the researcher (C) looking towards the NEATO robots (D) and the three piles of debris (red ovals for clarity)." caption="The 'Wizard' (A), a participant (B) with 'the researcher' (C), the NEATO robots (D), and three piles of debris to be cleaned (red ovals)." %}

The researcher, who in our study stands with the participant, introduces the scenario, shows the robot to the participant, and guides them into instructing it (i.e. they scaffold the participant's involvement in the study). The participant ostensibly talks *to* and *responds to* the vacuum. The Wizard---who is listening---responds to the request, in accordance with the fiction presented by the researcher *and* the notions of what a voice-controlled vacuum robot might *reasonably* respond to. It's the Wizard whom the participant is really instructing in such a study (as the voice-controlled robot is but a fiction). The researcher standing with the participant then must *performatively* account for the actions taken by the Wizard according to that fiction. In other words, whatever 'the robot does', the researcher must attribute its actions to the robot to conceal the machinations of the Wizard.

There are challenges with this too, of course: the Wizard must respond to the participants' requests in a way consistent with the fiction *quickly and consistently* in order to ensure the methodological validity of the study. We also discuss a situation in the article where there is a technical glitch with the robots, requiring both researchers to work together in an improvised manner to uphold the secrecy of the Wizard, while trying to collaboratively resolve the issues faced. Again, in that situation, accomplishing this while upholding the obligations becomes key to the actions of both the researcher and the Wizard.

{% include figure_image.html src="interaction-bothstages.png" alt="A triangular flow diagram surrounded by a box labelled front stage. The flow diagram shows that the researcher instructs a participant. The participant has a greyed out arrow suggesting they instruct a vacuum. The researcher responds to the vacuum, who has a greyed out arrow suggesting it responds to and is responded to by the participant, who responds to and is responded to by the researcher. The researcher never instructs the vacuum nor is does the vacuum respond to the researcher. There are three additional arrows, and a fourth interactant, the Wizard, whom is outside the front stage. The participant is shown to instruct the Wizard, who instructs the vacuum (which responds to the Wizard)." caption="The 'triad of fiction' from the paper." %}

Given the dramatic naming of the approach, we describe this accomplishment as a **triad of fiction**, with 'the researcher', participant, and robot interaction taking place on the 'front stage' (and the Wizard working 'backstage'). Around the same time as our article was in review, Martelaro et al. also identified this dichotomy of interaction, characterising it as 'front channel' and 'back channel' communication[^6]. See the figure for how we pictorially represent the communication between the various interactants in our study. 

## Practical takeaways

Above I've given a brief summary of the collaboration we observed unfolding but we also devote a fair chunk of the article to detailing the practical steps we took in implementing the study design and running the study. With this, we discuss how we used various technologies, piecing them together to present a believable 'voice-controlled robot'. We had a shared protocol document that both the researcher and the Wizard used to maintain awareness of each other's actions and an outline script that detailed the sorts of requests that the robot would respond positively (or not) to, and this was progressively updated throughout the studies. While we frame running a WOz study as a performance, we were keen to stress the methodological obligations involved too: the performance must be undertaken according to methodologically valid research practice. We argue this requires meticulous care and attention, and that this is driven by the collaboration of the researchers throughout. We end with a summary description of our work that we hope is of use to others in running WOz studies.

{% include associated_pubs.html pubs='Pulling Back the Curtain on the Wizards of Oz' %}

---

[^1]: Paul Green and Lisa Wei-Haas. 1985. *The Wizard of Oz: a tool for rapid development of user interfaces*. Final report. Technical Report. University of Michigan
[^2]: Kevin F White and Wayne G Lutters. 2003. Behind the Curtain: Lessons Learned from a Wizard of Oz Field Experiment. *SIGGROUP Bull*. 24, 3 (Dec. 2003), 129–135. [https://doi.org/10.1145/1052829.105285](https://doi.org/10.1145/1052829.105285 "Read 'Behind the Curtain: Lessons Learned from a Wizard of Oz Field Experiment'")
[^3]: John D Gould, John Conti, and Todd Hovanyecz. 1983. Composing Letters with a Simulated Listening Typewriter. *Commun. ACM* 26, 4 (April 1983), 295–308. [https://doi.org/10.1145/2163.358100](https://doi.org/10.1145/2163.358100 "Read 'Composing Letters with a Simulated Listening Typewriter'")
[^4]: Robin Wooffitt. 1994. Applying Sociology: Conversation Analysis in the Study of Human-(Simulated) Computer Interaction. *Bulletin of Sociological Methodology/Bulletin de Méthodologie Sociologique* 43, 1 (1994), 7–33. [https://doi.org/10.1177/075910639404300103](https://doi.org/10.1177/075910639404300103 "Read 'Applying Sociology: Conversation Analysis in the Study of Human-(Simulated) Computer Interaction'")
[^5]: Stephan Schlögl, Gavin Doherty, and Saturnino Luz. 2014. Wizard of Oz Experimentation for Language Technology Applications: Challenges and Tools. *Interacting with Computers* 27, 6 (may 2014), 592–615. [https://doi.org/10.1093/iwc/iwu016](https://doi.org/10.1093/iwc/iwu016 "Read 'Wizard of Oz Experimentation for Language Technology Applications: Challenges and Tools'")
[^6]: Nikolas Martelaro, Sarah Mennicken, Jennifer Thom, Henriette Cramer, and Wendy Ju. 2020. Using Remote Controlled Speech Agents to Explore Music Experience in Context. In *Proceedings of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive Systems Conference (DIS ’20)*. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2065–2076. [https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395440](https://doi.org/10.1145/3357236.3395440 "Read 'Wizard of Oz Experimentation for Language Technology Applications: Challenges and Tools'")